Roles and responsibilities first version (#6)
dbczumar/ops: part3/roles-responsibilities.qmd

## Introduction

> The emergence of AgentOps represents a fundamental shift in how organizations structure and manage AI-powered systems. It introduces the need for new role definitions, collaborative patterns, and operational frameworks to handle AI agents, non-deterministic behaviors, and multi-agent interactions. This evolution requires both role specialization and cross-functional integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The emergence of AgentOps represents a fundamental shift in how organizations structure and manage AI-powered systems. It introduces the need for new roles, collaborative patterns, and operational frameworks to handle the non-deterministic behaviors of AI agents and multi-agent interactions. This evolution requires both role specialization and cross-functional collaboration.
```

In this section, we will explore key roles and responsabilities within GenAI projects.

## Key Roles

> Most organisations are consumers of AI models rather than builders. Their primary focus tends to be on integration and orchestration, agent systems, cost management, prompt engineering, and ensuring safety and governance.

Author: added

The key roles listed below relate to how organisations implement GenAI. Because GenAI work requires significant collaboration, the exact division of responsibilities often depends on the organisation’s size. In some cases, one person may take on several roles, or hold a hybrid role that combines responsibilities from different areas.

### Technical Roles

These roles directly build, implement, and maintain AI systems, handling the hands-on technical work and domain expertise required to deliver AI solutions.

#### AI Engineer {.unnumbered}
An AI Engineer integrates and optimizes pre-trained AI models into production applications, focusing on making AI capabilities work reliably and cost-effectively within business systems rather than building models from scratch.

Primary Responsibilities:

* Integrate and fine-tune existing LLMs with most organizations using pre-trained models via APIs

> * Design and implement RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) architectures for domain specific applications

Reviewer: Instead of calling out / focusing on RAG exclusively, can we frame this as "developing tools" to give agents access to proprietary and external data?

Author: Good point, added in all affected parts

* Develop prompt engineering strategies and optimize prompt templates for production use
* Build evaluation and testing frameworks for non-deterministic AI systems, ensuring quality despite variable outputs

> * Optimize for cost and performance on the application logic level using prompt optimization, model selection, workflow design that minimizes API calls and output optimizaion.

Reviewer: What is output optimization?

Author: Here are techniques to reduce token consumption that response formatting. I have rephrased it to explain it better.

> * Create AI agents workflows and orchestrate AI tool chains for complex tasks

Reviewer: What is an AI agents workflow or tool chain? I agree that part of an AI Engineer's job is to develop tools that give agents access to external data sources, but I think we should cover that before optimizing cost / performance and before eval. This line seems a bit like AI-speak

* Deploy AI models into production environments with proper versioning and monitoring

#### Data Engineer {.unnumbered}

> GenAI Data Engineers support all data needs for AI applications. They're the bridge between raw data sources and AI systems, whether that's for RAG, AI agents, fine-tuning, analytics, or traditional business intelligence.

Reviewer: > whether that's for RAG, AI agents

"RAG" is a technique used by an AI Agent. A "RAG chain" is a rigid, non-agent architecture. Agents use RAG, but they aren't RAG chains.

Author: Adjusted

Primary Responsibilities:

* Create data pipelines that inject structured business data into AI prompts (customer records, product catalogs, transaction history)
* Process unstructured documents for AI consumption

> * Handle multi-modal data preprocessing (images, audio, video) for specialized AI applications

Reviewer: Can we provide more details? What kind of processing?

Author: Added in new commit

> * Build and maintain vector databases for semantic search and RAG applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Build and maintain vector databases for semantic search and document retrieval
```

https://github.com/dbczumar/ops/pull/6/files#r2370479308 (agents may use RAG too)

> * Implement embedding pipelines using embedding models

Reviewer: This part of vector database creation. Should we include it on the same line or as a sub-bullet?

> * Manage batch processing jobs for large-scale document embedding and updates

Reviewer: This is also related to building and maintaining vector databases. Sub-bullet?

* Prepare and version datasets for model fine-tuning when required
* Ensure data quality, governance, and compliance for all AI projects related data
* Implement feedback loops to capture user interactions and AI system responses for analysis

#### Software Engineer {.unnumbered}
A Software Engineer in GenAI teams builds user-facing applications that seamlessly incorporate AI capabilities, handling the integration, interface, and reliability challenges of non-deterministic AI systems.

> Primary Responsibilities:

Reviewer: There's a lot of overlap between Software Engineer and AI Agent:

```
An AI Engineer integrates and optimizes pre-trained AI models into production applications, focusing on making AI capabilities work reliably and cost-effectively within business systems rather than building models from scratch.
```

My view is that:

1. An AI platform engineer builds reusable infrastructure to power, debug, and monitor AI agents (conversation management, LLM API gateways, observability tooling - tracing, etc.)
2. An AI engineer builds an agent using the components provided by the AI platform engineering team
3. A software engineer integrates that agent into a larger application, e.g. by building a frontend around it

@jeannefukumaru thoughts?

Author: Agreed, added

* Build user interfaces for AI agents (e.g. chat interfaces, AI assistants)
* Design and build the user interface elements that make interactions with the GenAI solution smooth and intuitive, such as real-time response streaming, typing indicators, and feedback tools
* Develop backend services that integrate GenAI capabilities into core business processes and applications
* Manage conversation state and session persistence in GenAI applications
* Implement application-level error handling and user-friendly fallback experiences
* Create end-to-end testing strategies for features with non-deterministic GenAI components
* Optimize application performance
* Ensure GenAI solutions are reliably released and continuously monitored through CI/CD pipelines
* Implement telemetry and logging for debugging interactions

> #### Platform Engineer {.unnumbered}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### AI Platform Engineer {.unnumbered}
```

* Provision and scale the infrastructure that supports GenAI services and applications
* Implement cost optimization strategies (caching layers, rate limiting, usage caps)
* Build observability for GenAI systems (token usage monitoring, latency tracking, error rates)
* Manage API gateway configurations and load balancing across providers
* Handle multi-cloud orchestration and resource allocation
* Create CI/CD pipelines for GenAI application deployments
* Monitor and optimize infrastructure costs and performance
* Set up alerting for cost overruns and system failures
* Manage API keys, quotas, and provider relationships

#### Subject Matter Expert (SME) {.unnumbered}

A Subject Matter Expert brings deep domain knowledge to ensure AI solutions accurately address real business problems and comply with industry specific requirements.

Primary Responsibilities:

* Validate GenAI solution outputs for domain accuracy and relevance  
* Identify high value use cases specific to the business domain  

> * Provide training data examples and feedback for prompt optimization  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Provide training data examples and feedback that is used to improve agent quality
```

Primary Responsibilities:

* Implement guardrails against prompt injection and jailbreaking attempts
* Build content filtering and moderation systems for AI outputs
* Monitor for agent behavior drift and degradation in production
* Develop testing frameworks for edge cases and failure modes
* Create incident response procedures for AI failures
* Implement audit trails for AI decision-making
* Design fallback mechanisms and human-in-the-loop systems

#### LLMOps Engineer {.unnumbered}

An LLMOps Engineer specializes in the operational complexities unique to large language models, including managing prompt versioning, token optimization, model routing and managing inference costs at scale. 

> 

Reviewer: There's a lot of overlap here with AI Engineer (prompt engineering, versioning, etc.)

Perhaps we should focus this on managing LLM costs, availability, and routing? An AI Engineer who's developing an Agent would definitely iterate on prompts, but they probably wouldn't maintain a GPU deployment of an LLM (that's the job of an LLMOps Engineer)

* Manage model migrations and deprecations

#### Prompt Engineer {.unnumbered}

A Prompt Engineer translates business requirements into optimized instructions for AI models, systematically testing and refining prompts to improve accuracy while reducing costs. Today, these responsibilities are typically distributed among AI engineers (technical implementation), subject matter experts (domain knowledge), and product managers (use case definition). However, as organisations expand their use of generative AI, the complexity and scale of prompt design are driving the need for dedicated expertise. With prompt optimisation capable of delivering significant cost savings and the growing need for model-specific prompting techniques, specialised roles are becoming increasingly valuable.

Primary Responsibilities:

* Design and optimize prompt templates for specific business use cases
* Create prompt libraries and maintain documentation
* Conduct systematic testing of prompt variations
* Train non-technical teams on effective AI tool usage
* Develop prompt engineering guidelines and best practices
* Implement few-shot learning examples and chain-of-thought prompting

> * Optimize prompts for different models and use cases

Reviewer 2: Yes I agree let's leave out the specialized roles so we can focus on the main roles.

#### AI Engineer {.unnumbered}
An AI Engineer integrates and optimizes pre-trained AI models into production applications, focusing on making AI capabilities work reliably and cost-effectively within business systems rather than building models from scratch.

Many of today's AI Engineers come from diverse backgrounds: software engineers bring system design and production expertise, data scientists contribute their understanding of model behavior and evaluation, while ML engineers naturally transition their model deployment skills to the LLM era. This diversity is essential because AI Engineers must understand both the probabilistic nature of AI models and the deterministic requirements of production systems.

Primary Responsibilities:

* Integrate and fine-tune existing LLMs with business logic and data sources, typically using APIs to pre-trained models
* Develop tools that give AI agents access to APIs and proprietary and external data sources
* Design and implement the agent behavior
* Build evaluation and testing to ensure quality

> * Refine performance based on evaluation output and feedback
> * Optimize for cost and performance on the application logic level using prompt optimization, model selection, workflow design that minimizes API calls and response formatting that reduces token consumption.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Refine performance based on output of evaluation suits and SME feedback
* Optimize agent design for cost and performance. Commonly used techniques include using prompt optimization, model selection, smart workflow designs that minimize API calls and response formatting that reduces token consumption.
```

* Deploy AI agents into production with proper versioning and monitoring

#### Data Engineer {.unnumbered}
GenAI Data Engineers support all data needs for AI applications. They're the bridge between raw data sources and AI systems, whether that's for RAG pipelines, AI agents, fine-tuning, analytics, or traditional business intelligence.

Traditional data engineers are rapidly acquiring new skills in vector databases, embedding models, and unstructured data processing. The shift from structured SQL databases to semantic search has required a fundamental rethinking of data architecture. 

Primary Responsibilities:

> * Design and maintain pipelines for structured data by delivering business data (e.g., customer records, product catalogs, transactions) into AI workflows by extracting from source systems, transforming into schemas, validating quality, and loading into feature stores or tables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Design and maintain structured data pipelines that connect business-level data (e.g., customer records, product catalogs, transactions) with AI workflows. These pipelines typically involve extracting data from source systems into schemas customized for a use case, validating data quality and sanitizing data to remove sensitive information
```

* Build pipelines for unstructured documents such as PDFs, emails, and reports, using OCR and text extraction, metadata tagging, text cleaning, chunking large documents and conversion into structured formats (e.g. JSON).
* Develop preprocessing workflows for multimodal data (images, audio, video), including resizing images, extracting features, transcribing audio, segmenting videos, generating metadata and storing the outputs.
* Support retrieval and embedding systems by building and maintaining vector databases for semantic search, implementing embedding pipelines, and running batch jobs to embed and update large document collections.
* Manage data lifecycle and quality by versioning datasets for fine-tuning, enforcing data quality and governance, and implementing feedback loops that capture user interactions for continuous improvement.

#### Software Engineer {.unnumbered}

> A software engineer integrates the agent into larger application, making AI capabilities accessible and reliable for end users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A software engineer integrates the agent system into a larger application, making AI capabilities accessible for end users. Common end-user interfaces include bot integrations with Slack and Microsoft Teams, summary analysis reports delivered to an inbox daily, or standalone chat interfaces. 
```

* Optimize agent design for cost and performance. Commonly used techniques include using prompt optimization, model selection, smart workflow designs that minimize API calls and response formatting that reduces token consumption
* Deploy AI agents into production with proper versioning and monitoring

> AI Engineers often leverage Model Serving for deployment, MLflow for experiment tracking, Vector Search for RAG implementations, and AI Playground for rapid prototyping and testing.

Reviewer 2: This confuses customers, but the official product names are Mosaic AI Model Serving and Mosaic AI Vector Search

Author: Good point, iI have added the correct name
